# Library-Management-System
It is a library management system using Python tkinter and MYSQL.

MYSQL:-
First create a database named “projectx”  then create four tables in it those are students, books, assignment and display.
Let’s talk about first table  “students”  in this table we have all the students that are in the college in this table we have three columns that are Roll_no(Student Roll number), Sname(Student name) and Branch, in the Roll_no column we have used the primary key that means this entry cannot be duplicated or in a simpler meaning no two roll number will be same,  every roll number you enter should be unique.
Second table is “books” in this table we have four columns that are Sr_no(Serial number), Bookname ,Price and Status. In this table Sr_no  column is auto increment that means when you add a book it will automatically assign it a serial number you don’t need to write the serial number everytime you add a book, it also  has Status column which shows whether  the book is currently available or not , in the Sr_no  column we have used the primary key that means every serial number will be different from each other, no two same serial number will be there.
Third table is “assignment” in this table we have five columns that are Srbook(Serial number of the book), Rstudent(Roll number of the student ), Assign_date, Submit_date and Fine. In Srbook and Rstudent  column we have used foreign key that means these column will only have entries which are in the Sr_no(serial number of the book) column and Roll_no(Roll number of the student) column respectively so it reduces the chances of the error.
Fourth table is “display” in this table we have six column the five columns are same as assignment table it has one extra column named Student_status , it shows whether the student is still in the college or left the college.

Python :-
When you run the program then first of all a login window will appear which will ask your username and password if either of them is wrong then a notification window will appear and inform you that either your username is wrong or your password is wrong and if both are right then a new window will appear which have various buttons having different functions, it has a exit button on the bottom when you click on it the whole program will be closed.
Now we are in the options window we have different buttons like "Add a book", "Add a student", "Display books", "Display students", "Assign a book", "Submit a book", "Remove a book", "Remove a student", "Search a book", Search a student", "Display assigned books", it also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
When you click on the "Add a book" button then a new window will appear in which you will see two text boxes in which you have to write the "Book Name" and "Price" and then click on the Add button your data will be automatically stored in the MYSQL  database table named books and it will automatically assigned a serial number to your new book and automatically fill the column Status with Available. It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
When you click on the “Add a student” button then a new window will appear in which you will see three text boxes in which you have to write the "Roll No" , “Student Name " and “Branch" and then click on the Add button your data will be automatically stored in the MYSQL database table named students . It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
When you click on the “Display books” button then all the books’ names that are in the   database will be displayed on the screen. It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed. 
When you click on the “Display students” button then all the students’ names that are in the   database will be displayed on the screen. It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
When you click on the “Assign a book” button then a new window will appear in which you will see headings of  Book’s Serial number and Roll number you will get a list (Combobox)  of serial numbers  and  roll numbers that are in the database. Select a serial number and a roll number from the list and click on the assign button after clicking the button a book of your serial number will be assigned to the roll number which you select and both the entries will be stored in the assignment table and at the same time that day’s date will be automatically be stored in the Assign_date column of assignment table. Submit_date and Fine column of assignment table will be filled with 0000-00-00 and 0 values respectively.  And all the data which are storing in the assignment table will be copied into the display table simultaneously . It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
When you click on the “Submit a book” button then a new window will appear in which you will see headings of  Book’s Serial number and Roll number you will get a list (Combobox)  of serial numbers  and  roll numbers that are in the database. You wll also get a textbox in which you can add additional fine if you find any problem with the book like book is damaged or book is lost. It has a fine button on which you click then a window will appear and tells you how much fine one has on him/her. Select a serial number and roll number and then click on the submit button now values of the Submit_date  column will change from 0000-00-00 to current date and now system will automatically calculate the difference between Assign date and submit date and if the difference between both dates is greater than 15 days then there will be a fine of 2rs/day. The more days the more fine. After clicking the submit button a notification will come that will you how much fine is there on that particular student.  And all the data which are storing in the assignment table will be copied into the display table simultaneously.  It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
When you click on the “Remove a book” button then a new window will appear in which you have to select  a serial number from the database and click on the remove button and book will be removed from the database and you will receive a notification that book has been removed. It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
 When you click on the “Remove a student” button then a new window will appear in which you have to select  a roll number from the database and click on the remove button and student will be removed from the database and you will receive a notification that student has been removed. And value of Student_staus in the display table will change from student to no longer student, so that by seeing the data we will know that the particular student is no longer in the college.  It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
When you click on the “Search a book” button then a new window will appear in which you have to select  either a book name or a serial number from the database and click on the search button then you will able to see all the details like Book’s serial number, book’s name , book’s price and status that means whether the book is available for borrowing or not and then a refresh button when you click on it all the values are removed from the screen and you get a fresh screen for further operations. It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
 When you click on the “Search a student” button then a new window will appear in which you have to select  either a student name or a student roll number from the database and click on the search button then you will able to see all the details like roll number of the student, student name and branch.  And then a refresh button when you click on it all the values are removed from the screen and you  will  get a fresh screen for further operations. It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.
When  you click on the “Display assigned books”  button  then  a new window will appear in which you will have two choices first one to see all the books that are assigned till now and second one to see the assigned books between two dates . Select one option and click on display button and you will see all the details of the books that are assigned. It also has a back button when you click on it this window will be closed.

-----------------------------------:  Why the project is useful  :-------------------
1.	The project is password protected when you have correct username and password then only you can use this if it is a normal register then anyone will use it and there will be no protection.
2.	It has very low chances of making errors because you don’t  have to write everywhere like when you are displaying books or students, assigning books, submitting books, removing books/students, searching a book or student, displaying assigned books.  Every function use database’s  data so you just have to use mouse click everywhere so chances of making errors in this is negligible.
3.	It is user friendly it is very easy to use and many of the columns (data) are filling themselves you don’t need to fill them like when you are assigning books or submitting the books it automatically takes date you don’t need to write dates  everytime,  plus for fine function it will automatically calculate the fine you don’t need to calculate anything and on one click you can clear anyone’s fine.
4.	The whole data is storing in the database so you can transfer that data from one device to another without any problems. You can also use this data for any other purposes.
5.	You can store bulk amount of data very easily. If it is a paper register then you have to change that register frequently but in this system  you don’t need to do that.
6.	Data processing is very easy in system like this.
